[Docs] Terrain tutorial update (#2146)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/create-terrain-from-images/create-terrain-assets.md

---
linkTitle: Create Terrain Assets
title: Create Terrain Assets
description: Create the terrain assets needed for this tutorial.
weight: 200
toc: true
---

## Goal

In this tutorial section, you will create the terrain assets needed for authoring the example terrain in a level.

> ## Create a surface tag name list

Author: I'd prefer to leave this section where it's at, though I agree it's a little bit awkward.

The Surface Tag Name List _is_ an asset, which is why I've put it in the "Create Terrain Assets" tutorial. I put it at the top because it's a more fundamental asset than the rendering assets. It's something that you need and use even if you don't have any rendering in your level at all.

I originally had the asset creation in the "Texture the Terrain" topic, but that topic became extremely bulky and was covering too many concepts at once, which is why I split this page out. 

In particular, I also kept moving around the combination of the "Surface Tag Name List" creation and the "add a Terrain Surface Gradient List" component, since these are both about defining fundamental terrain data, not about rendering. But I put the Terrain Surface Gradient List steps back onto the "Texture the Terrain" page because it's really hard to visualize and understand the surface types without the rendering piece to support it.

    * rock_boulder_dry_**diff**\_4k &rarr; rock_boulder_dry\_**basecolor**
    * rock_boulder_dry_**disp**\_4k &rarr; rock_boulder_dry\_**displ**
    * rock_boulder_dry_**nor**\_gl_4k &rarr; rock_boulder_dry\_**normal**
    * rock_boulder_dry_**rough**\_4k &rarr; rock_boulder_dry\_**roughness**

2. Create a Terrain Detail Material with the Material Editor. Open the Material Editor, select File -> New Material Document..., and create a `Terrain Detail Material`. Note that we aren't choosing `Standard PBR` here because we would like the additional terrain texture controls that are available on a `Terrain Detail Material`. Name the material `forrest_ground_01.material` and save it in your tutorial level folder.

3. Select the `forrest_ground_01_basecolor` for **Texture** under **Base Color**, `forrest_ground_01_roughness` for **Texture** under **Roughness**, `forrest_ground_01_normal` for **Texture** under **Normal**, `forrest_ground_01_ao` for **Diffuse AO** under **Occlusion**, and `forrest_ground_01_displ` for **Height Map** under **Displacement**.

4. The normal maps from Poly Haven need their normals flipped by default, so enable **Flip Y Channel** under **Normal**.

> 5. Under **Base Color**, set the **Texture Blend Mode** to `Lerp` and the **Factor** to `0.5`. For terrain detail materials, we will typically use a **Texture Blend Mode** of `LinearLight` to blend between a high-frequency detail material and a low-frequency macro material. Refer to [Terrain Detail Material](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-detail-material) and the [Understanding Frequency Separation](/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/understanding-frequency-separation) tutorial for more details. Less often, we might choose to use a **Texture Blend Mode** of `Lerp` with a **Factor** of `0.0` to blend from just the macro material at far distance to just the detail material at close distances. This is used in workflows where the detail materials contain full-color information and the macro material is just a low-resolution composite of the detail materials, not a separate texture used for color variation. However, for this tutorial we would like to demonstrate blending between the macro material and the detail materials for color variation without walking through the additional texture processing steps. We can achieve a lesser-quality version of the blending by setting the **Texture Blend Mode** under **Base Color** to `Lerp` and a **Factor** of 0.5. This will perform a 50% alpha blend between the macro material and the detail material which lets them both be visible, but will produce a softer lower-quality result than the full frequency separation workflow. The chart below shows the effects of the different Lerp factors to help visualize how the blending changes the outputs.

Reviewer: Nice! This link will pair nicely with my tutorial :)

> 5. Under **Base Color**, set the **Texture Blend Mode** to `Lerp` and the **Factor** to `0.5`. For terrain detail materials, we will typically use a **Texture Blend Mode** of `LinearLight` to blend between a high-frequency detail material and a low-frequency macro material. Refer to [Terrain Detail Material](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-detail-material) and the [Understanding Frequency Separation](/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/understanding-frequency-separation) tutorial for more details. Less often, we might choose to use a **Texture Blend Mode** of `Lerp` with a **Factor** of `0.0` to blend from just the macro material at far distance to just the detail material at close distances. This is used in workflows where the detail materials contain full-color information and the macro material is just a low-resolution composite of the detail materials, not a separate texture used for color variation. However, for this tutorial we would like to demonstrate blending between the macro material and the detail materials for color variation without walking through the additional texture processing steps. We can achieve a lesser-quality version of the blending by setting the **Texture Blend Mode** under **Base Color** to `Lerp` and a **Factor** of 0.5. This will perform a 50% alpha blend between the macro material and the detail material which lets them both be visible, but will produce a softer lower-quality result than the full frequency separation workflow. The chart below shows the effects of the different Lerp factors to help visualize how the blending changes the outputs.

Author: I reworked steps 1, 2, and 5 to remove the use of "we". I rewrote a larger chunk of step 5 than you did above which is why I didn't accept the suggestion as-is. Please look and see if the new wording is better.

    | Base Macro Color | Detail Lerp 1.0 | Detail Lerp 0.5 | Detail Lerp 0.0 |
    | - | - | - | - |
    | {{< image-width src="/images/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/terrain-from-images/terrain-macro-only.png" alt="Comparison image showing only the macro material." >}} | {{< image-width src="/images/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/terrain-from-images/terrain-macro-lerp-1.png" alt="Comparison image showing the macro material plus a detail material with Lerp 1.0." >}} | {{< image-width src="/images/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/terrain-from-images/terrain-macro-lerp-0.5.png" alt="Comparison image showing the macro material plus a detail material with Lerp 0.5." >}} | {{< image-width src="/images/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/terrain-from-images/terrain-macro-lerp-0.png" alt="Comparison image showing the macro material plus a detail material with Lerp 0.0." >}} |

6. Scale the textures larger. This is purely an aesthetic choice, it helps the details in the textures become more visible. Set **Tile U** and **Tile V** under **UVs** to 0.25 to make the textures 4x larger than default.

> 7. Set the terrain height blending parameters. Under Terrain, enable **Override parallax settings**, set **Height offset** to 0.25, **Height scale** to 0.5, **Blend factor** to 0.5, and **Weight clamp factor** to 0.2. These values are tuned based on the aesthetics, they control how the detail material blends with other detail materials when height-based blending is enabled.

Author: ```suggestion
7. Set the terrain height blending parameters. Under **Terrain**, enable **Override parallax settings**, set **Height offset** to 0.25, **Height scale** to 0.5, **Blend factor** to 0.5, and **Weight clamp factor** to 0.2. These values are tuned based on the aesthetics, they control how the detail material blends with other detail materials when height-based blending is enabled.
```

> 8. Follow steps 2-7 again for `rock_boulder_dry`, using the appropriate textures. Also, set **Tile U** and **Tile V** to 0.125 to make this material 8x larger than default, and set **Height offset** to 0.0, **Height scale** to 1.0, **Blend factor** to 0.2, and **Weight clamp factor** to 0.2. Once again, these values have been chosen based on aesthetics for this material.

Author: ```suggestion
8. Follow steps 2-7 again to create a material named `rock_boulder_dry.material`, using the `rock_boulder_dry` textures that were downloaded. For this material, when following step 7, set **Tile U** and **Tile V** to 0.125 to make this material 8x larger than default, and set **Height offset** to 0.0, **Height scale** to 1.0, **Blend factor** to 0.2, and **Weight clamp factor** to 0.2. Once again, these values have been chosen based on aesthetics for this material.
```
